All right in this lecture we're going to focus on how we can find the users location so we're not really
concerned about the map stuff about displaying where the current user is it's more about we just want
to find out their latitude and longitude be able to track movements there.
How do we get the permissions for that to happen.
There's a whole sort of process that we've got to follow for this.
So let's go ahead and start a new Android studio project.
We're going to go ahead and call this location demo and we'll just do our defaults.
We want the blank activity again we don't need to work with the map stuff on this one so we'll go ahead
and move forward here.
So like I said the very first thing that we want to move forward with before we do anything is that
we've got to get permission from the user in order to access their location right which makes sense.
It kind of creepy if and abstracting your location and you had no idea about it like you want to be
able to give that app that permission.
And it's the exact same process about when we asked the user if we can use their internet connection
that's inside that Android manifest where we go ahead and ask for that piece of information.
So what we're going to do.
So open up our app here and double click on our manifest and just like we do up at the top here.
We're going to go ahead and do our angle bracket here we'll give Android studio a second I'm trying
to get going right off the go.
But it's you know just finished putting all this stuff together for us.
Let's see.
Come here and wait a second.
There we go.
So we are looking for a use's permission.
And when we do this are all sorts of options here.
And the one that we're looking for is access fine control.
Now there is of course control the difference between the two is fine it's like really specifically
looking for where the devices like it really utilizes the GPS.
Whereas the course more just sort of uses Wi-Fi and you know the network pinpointing of stuff.
So if you don't need as precise a stuff you can probably roll with course but if you really need to
know for most I think mapping applications you're going to want to use a fine location.
But again that's up to you and you want to be conscious of how much battery you're using on the user's
device so will use find location it will end up that tag right there so that's everything we need to
do to get the user's permission.
Then let's go ahead and move into our main activity and we're going to start writing some code in order
to get the users location.
So if you've ever worked with iOS before you'll see that the situation is pretty similar.
Basically we create something called a location manager that manages all our location tracking and then
we have this location listener that gives us updates about whenever the user says yes or no to things
or if they're going to you know whenever the device moves it sort of gives an update there we're going
to create all those.
So the first one that we need is a location manager and we're just going to go ahead and call that location
manager and we'll set this equal to this get system service OK.
And then inside of here we're going to say capital context dot and we want to get location service.
OK so this tells us hey we want to create this location manager that's going to you know get the users
location.
And with this we need to go ahead and actually cast this to say this should be a location manager.
All right.
Then will get rid of our first air there for us.
We're going to have more in a second here.
But just give this a moment.
The next thing that we want to do is we want to create our location listener so we want location listener.
Let me go ahead and enter so we get that import we'll say location listener is equal to a new location
listener and you can see when we do the autocomplete for that pool it brings up a lot of stuff so there's
a couple of different functions here.
The big one that you want to focus on is this location change so this is when you know all of a sudden
we get you know the device move this much further that much further or just regular updates from the
GPS telling us hey things have changed here.
You should know about it this on status change us is telling us hey you know the user either said yes
to working with this.
They said no to working with IT stuff like that.
It's kind of the big stuff they're saying hey whether or not this is all working.
So on location change we want to know whether or not we are able to get the user's location here.
And so let's just go ahead and log out this information.
So I will say log I and let's just say this is going to be location and then for our second parameter
here we're going to take the location that we get right there.
We can actually turn that into a string if we do dot to string.
OK.
So that will be something readable that we can actually go ahead and check out.
Now in order for us to get any of this information I know that we have a location manager I know that
we have a location listener and I know that we in the manifest said hey we need the user's permission
but we actually have to write the code to ask for permission from the user.
So in order to get this we're going to go outside of this location listener.
So we want to and don't forget we need a semi-colon there.
But we want to go outside of this location listener so down below here we're going to do a big IF statement
where we can check and see if the user has granted us permission.
So what we're going to do is we're going to first reference context.
Contex compact dot and we want check self permission.
And in this there's a couple of things that we want to provide.
So first this is going to be the context that it needs the next piece of information it needs is asking
you know what sort of permission it is that we're looking for so we're going to say here manifest permission
and this is where we want to say access capital access fine location.
Remember when we were choosing between fine location and course location that's what that's all about
there.
So that's closed up in that parentheses.
And we want to know if this is not equal to capital package manager dot in all capitals.
Permission granted.
So what we're checking for here is before we ask for permission we're saying hey did they give us permission
to access the find location or we're saying if they didn't give us this permission this is where we
would want to move forward and ask for that.
So the code that we would run is activity compact.
I guess I should just type that out and here we go.
Activity.
Compact.
OK.
And we're going to say Dot.
Request permission permissions within us and we'll say this for the context.
The next thing is we need to provide that we're looking for the access of foreign control.
So we're actually going to create a little string array thing here we're going to see a new capital
string array.
And then in here right afterwards we are going to provide some curly brackets.
We are going to say inside we go inside these curly brackets manifest permission.
And there's that same access fine location.
So we're asking for that and after we've done that so after that ending curly bracket we're going to
go ahead and provide the number one.
Now you might be wondering well what is this number about.
Well when we go in ahead and ask for this you can keep these numbers to keep track of you know which
they call them request codes you were looking for but we don't really care only asking for one permission
here soldiers kind of keep that as is.
So let's go ahead and test and see if this works.
When the app opens up please don't automatically say yes to granting the permission.
We just want to check and see if our message is even showing up here right.
So because we don't have anything right now that we you know basically we create the location manager
and listener but we never activate them.
We just want to make sure that we can at least get the message that says hey you know here is the question
asking you if we can use your location.
So go ahead and wait by the emulator here just for a second.
Looks like it's taking a little bit of time here.
But look at that.
It finished up so up it pops and you'll see when the app opens up it's asking allow location to access
this device location.
So it's got that option there for us and it could be really tempting to go say allow or deny but there's
a little bit more code that we want to right for this.
So what we're going to do is we're going to move up top.
And there's a particular method that we want to implement that tells us when someone is requesting permission
and they've either said yes or no to that question.
So if you just start typing on request permission result.
There we go.
If you hit enter on that it's going to implement a ton of stuff here.
Kind of get you the basics of what you need but and this tells us whether or not the user said yes or
no to granting their permission.
So the first thing that we want to do is check and see if we got permission.
So the way that we can do this is we're going to make an if statement.
And in this if statement the first thing that we're going to ask is OK if the grant results so we'll
go ahead and say Grant results.
And this has passed in over here so I can say if Grignon results length is greater than zero that's
the first check that we want to do and then we're going to say.
And by doing two ampler stamps so we want that to be true and we want to say Grant results access the
first item in that array.
So we checked this first to make sure there was at least something in there so say and if there is something
we'll go ahead look at the first option and see if this is equal to we need to equal signs package manager
dot and this is where we want the Capitol permission granted so this will tell us yes or no whether
or not they said yes to us.
So if this is the case we want to start working with the location manager and the listener.
So I'm actually going to copy these two things and add them as properties up to the top there or define
them there.
So we've got location manager and listener.
All right.
And then we'll update this on create so that we're not redefining there.
Let's go ahead and update that.
So with those in place now we can write this cool line of code where we say OK.
Location Manager.
Remember everything sort of moves through the manager We're going to say location manager dot and we're
going to ask for location update saying Hey any time you move update whatever we want to know about
it.
So we're going to say request location updates.
All right.
And there's a couple of things that we've got to pass in here.
So the first thing that we need to do is say that we are looking for information from the GPS GPS so
we're going to say location manager and this is Capitol location manager dot and there's a couple of
options here.
But we want GPS provider.
So we'll go ahead and select that one.
The next thing that it's looking for is you know how much you want to be updated about things.
So in our case we're going to put zero for the time and if you comma comments also going to ask for
the distance we're going to put zero there and that's basically saying hey you know we could just update
your information every couple of seconds or maybe every minute or whatever it is and or you know only
update when the user moves more than like 10 meters.
And again these are measures that we can use to save the user some battery life.
But in this case we're just trying to figure out this location thing.
So we want to use zero minutes zero meters meaning that we just want all the information give us any
sort of update that you have about the user's location.
Then after that you can see it's looking for a location listener which we have already created.
So we're just going to go ahead and pass and our location Lessner.
All right.
So that's all the code that we need.
Except you'll see that we get this big nasty air here and it is asking us hey you've got to do one more
check to make sure that this is actually OK.
So we can actually just go ahead and do the check that we do down here.
This big statement that we make sure that we have access to do this.
So I'll just go ahead and copy the top part of this statement including that curly bracket and we'll
just paste it above here.
We'll do an ending curly bracket down below so that that sort of wraps everything up and the big thing
that we want to check here is that this is equal to Permission granted because down here we're saying
hey if the permission hasn't been granted then we want to go request it.
Whereas in this situation we're saying OK if we did get permission granted then we want to go ahead
and do this so I know a little bit crazy that we have to provide this question twice.
And I just realized I've put this statement in the wrong location so I'm going to go ahead and copy
this and cut it.
And we're going to put it the first thing that we want to check for is that top level if statement here
right where we check to see if the length is greater than zero and all that stuff and then we'll do
this one.
So with those things in place let's go ahead and check out our app.
So we'll go ahead and hit the run button here on the simulator.
And we'll see what it is that we get.
Let me go ahead and open up our device so we're going to say allow to this
so and I'm not exactly sure where the app went let's try this one more time.
Can app opens up.
And if we go ahead and check our logs hopefully we have a location here and Denton and a
I'm looking for a location but I never saw one and that could have been because before we hit OK there
we had entered in that we had already wanted to give permission.
So I kind of ruined that special moment because this was supposed to show you how all of that worked.
But I'm going to show you how we can fix this because right now we're only asking for the users location
updates which is really that tells us when we get the information we're only asking for that when the
user says yes to it so if the users already said yes this method never gets called and so in that case
we'd want to do an else statement here that basically says hey if the user has already given us permission
then it's appropriate for you to go ahead and ask for some updates.
So let's go ahead and scroll up here.
We're just going to copy this line exactly where we basically say hey go ahead and give us the update
so we'll copy this paste it down below.
And now let's try running this in our app.
Make sure we got latet up and running here so we can see this.
And I do all that work to tell you not to touch the thing and then I go ahead and touch it at the wrong
time.
I feel foolish about that.
But here we go.
Now you might be a little bit disappointed saying we didn't get the location showing up here what the
heck's going on with that.
Well with the emulator we have to sort of manually give some of the location stuff so to the right of
the emulator if you hit this little dot it shows you some of the controls that you can affect and if
you click on location here you can actually provide a latitude and longitude So I think this right now
centered on San Francisco.
So if we hit send here look at that.
It prints out the location which means that we got to this point in our code right.
Like we were able to log this information and that's pretty cool that you know we can put in any sort
of latitude and longitude that we want like I could send this for example and boom all of sudden that
comes through 54 64.
So there you have it.
Like I said not super exciting because you know we're not we don't have this on a map or anything but
that's what we're going to be covering in our next lecture and it's going to be a cool challenge for
you because you've learned a lot of stuff.
It's now time to sort of bring it all together so let's go ahead and talk about it in the next lecture.